website/docs: Flesh out Google Workspaces SAML. (#12701)
goauthentik/authentik: website/docs/users-sources/sources/social-logins/google/workspace/index.md

We'll now configure authentik to accept SAML authentication from Google Workspace.

Start by logging into your authentik instance as an administrator and navigating to the _admin interface_.

### Creating a Federation Source

From the admin interface, navigate to _Directory_ › _Federation & Social login_ and press **Create**.

Within the new source dialog, choose **"SAML Source"** and continue by filling in the following fields with your desired values:

| Field | Value            |
| ----- | ---------------- |
| Name  | Google Workspace |
| Slug  | `google`         |

:::info

Heads up! Your choice of `slug` should match the ACS URL you provided to Google Workspace.
You can choose a different slug, but you will need to update the ACS URL in Google Workspace to match.

:::

#### Protocol Settings

Next, we'll configure the SAML protocol settings for the source. Fill in the following fields with the values you copied from Google Workspace:

|                  |                                                           |
| ---------------- | --------------------------------------------------------- |
| SSO URL          | `https://accounts.google.com/o/saml2/idp?idpid=#########` |

> | Entity ID/Issuer | `https://accounts.google.com/o/saml2?idpid=#########`     |

Author: Thanks for catching this!

Ironically, I made this mix-up on my first run through setting up SAML. The "idP-to-idP" flow can make keeping track of this distinction especially tricky!

After speaking with the authentik team about the differences between the existing Google documentation and the new SAML instructions, I can follow up with an update for each integration flow 😊

---

> title: Google Workspace with SAML

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: Google Workspace (with SAML)
```

> sidebar_label: Workspace SAML

Reviewer: ```suggestion
sidebar_label: Google Workspace (SAML)
```

tags: [integration, saml, google]
---

<span className="badge badge--primary">Support level: authentik</span>

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

This topic covers configuring authentik to authenticate users with their Google Workspace credentials.

```

## What is Google Workspace?

Google Workspace (formerly G Suite) is a collection of cloud computing, productivity and collaboration tools, software and products developed and marketed by Google.

> Organizations using Google Workspace allow their users to authenticate into applications using their company email addresses. This guide shows how to set up Security Assertion Markup Language (<abbr>SAML</abbr>) as the authentication method between Google Workspace and authentik.

Reviewer 2: I think we might want to make this distinction a bit more easily findable, maybe a small index page for the sidebar category that says when to use either method?

Reviewer: Is the distinction between using GWS as a source, versus using SAML as a middle-man between GWS and authentik? I didn't even catch the two methods when reading this paragraph. Yes, agree they need to be more clearly two separate options... instead of adding another page, I'd suggesting creating a top-level landing page where that info and other conceptual info can go.

Reviewer: In general we need a sentence or two at top of every page clarifying what this page is about...

Reviewer: Add this to the top-level Google page, as conceptual,please.

## SAML Authentication Flow

> This sequence diagram shows a high-level flow between user, authentik, Google, and the target application.

Reviewer: Do we need to specify Google Workspace, Google Cloud, Google Google... ?

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
    autonumber
    participant User
    participant authentik
    participant Google
    participant App

    User->>App: User navigates to app...
    App-->>authentik: ← Redirected to authentik
    Note over authentik: User chooses "Google Workspace"
    authentik-->>Google: Redirect to Google →
    Note over Google: Authenticate with email and password
    Google-->>authentik: ← Redirect to authentik
    authentik-->>App: Redirect to app →
```

In short, the user navigates to the application, is redirected to authentik, chooses Google Workspace as the authentication method, authenticates with Google, and is redirected back to the application.

> The key characteristic that makes this an idP-to-idP flow is that Authentik is acting as an intermediary identity provider, brokering trust between your application and Google Workspace.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The key characteristic that makes this an idP-to-idP flow is that authentik is acting as an intermediary identity provider, brokering trust between your application and Google Workspace.
```

---

> ## Integration

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Google Workspace configuration
```

Reviewer: let's avoid the word integration (even though it clearly in an integration haha), and also to be [somewhat] consistent wit the other Source docs. (Though wow now I see that the Source docs are as inconsistent as the Integration docs!)

> By the end of this integration, your authentik instance will allow users to authenticate using their Google Workspace credentials.

Reviewer: @Teffen oyu and I had a good convo the other day about our need to make it more clear at the beginning of each page what exactly the page is about, what the task/goal of the process described on the page is. This sort of sentence ("By the end of this integration, your authentik instance will allow users to authenticate using their Google Workspace credentials.") is really what we need at very top of page. I'll go back up and make a suggestion.

> You'll need to have authentik instance running and accessible on an HTTPS domain, and a Google Workspace domain with super-administrator access.

Reviewer: I like the friendliness of this tone.. am not sure I like it better than the lean-mean bullet points normally seen in a Prerequsites section (that people need to be able to quickly scan). But let's leave it for now and think on it and get feedback.

Keep a text-editor handy because we'll be copying and pasting values between the two services.

:::info

> The following placeholders are used in this guide:

Reviewer: I have come to the realization that I am not a fan of using a table for such a short list of values. If there werre many many, then perhaps. But adding a table here is a lot more "visual load" than I think is needed. Also... it would again be inconsistent. For across-many-docs changes like this, let's look at doing a separate PR that would change it everywhere (a huge task that I don't thiink we need to undertake right now).

|                     |                                                           |
| ------------------- | --------------------------------------------------------- |
| `authentik.company` | The Fully Qualified Domain Name of the authentik install. |

:::

> ## Google Workspace Configuration

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Google Workspace configuration
```

> We'll need some information from Google to complete the integration, so we'll

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We'll need some information from Google to complete the integration, so
```

start by logging into [Workspace Admin Console](https://admin.google.com/) as a super-admin.

> ### Creating a new app

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Create a new application
```

Reviewer: We moved away from gerunds, and lets spell out application in almost all cases.

From the Workspace Admin Console, navigate to the _Apps_ section, and then to _Web and mobile apps_.
Continue by expanding the **Add app** dropdown and selecting **Add custom SAML app.**

> Within the app creation page, fill in the following fields with your desired values:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Within the app creation page, fill in the following fields:
```

Reviewer: Because these are pretty basics fields, I don't think we need to list them out in a table. Bolding the field name and reducing it to one sentence helps keep the doc "lean".

> | Field       | Value                        |

Reviewer: Let's remove the table and just mention the filed names inlne.

| ----------- | ---------------------------- |
| Name        | authentik                    |
| Description | Single Sign-On for authentik |

### Google Identity Provider details

> Next, you'll be presented with information we'll need to configure authentik. Under _Option 2_, copy the SSO URL and download the certificate.

Reviewer: Is Option 2 a UI component, a tab... an area of the UI/page? If it's a UI element or label, etc., it should be bold. Per Style Guide, we use italics for variables.

Can we provide a bit more info about where to find this Option 2?

:::warning

> authentik is acting as both a Service Provider (SP) to Google and an Identity Provider (idP) to your applications. Since we only need the SP configuration, you can ignore the Entity ID provided by Google.

Reviewer 2: While the config is correct the explanation doesn't make sense (and I believe it should still work with google's entity ID set in both)

|           |                                                           |
| --------- | --------------------------------------------------------- |
| SSO URL   | `https://accounts.google.com/o/saml2/idp?idpid=#########` |
| Entity ID | ~~`https://accounts.google.com/o/saml2?idpid=#########`~~ |

:::

### Service Provider details

> We'll need to provide Google with some information about our authentik instance, specifically the Assertion Consumer Service (ACS) URL. This URL is where Google will send the SAML response after a user has authenticated. We'll also need to provide the Entity ID, which can be any unique identifier, but we recommend using the URL of your authentik instance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We'll need to provide Google with some information about our authentik instance, specifically the Assertion Consumer Service (ACS) URL. This URL is where Google sends the SAML response after a user is authenticated. We'll also need to provide the Entity ID, which can be any unique identifier, but we recommend using the URL of your authentik instance.
```

| Field           | Value                                               |
| --------------- | --------------------------------------------------- |
| ACS URL         | `https://authentik.company/source/saml/google/acs/` |
| Entity ID       | `https://authentik.company`                         |

> | Name ID format  | EMAIL                                               |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Name ID format  | _email address_                                               |
```

Reviewer: for variables we want to use italics... and it's always email address, not just email.

> | Name ID format  | EMAIL                                               |

Reviewer: IS EMAIL the literal value that they enter? For Name ID, what do they enter? (Also we need to say "email address" not just "email".)

| Name ID         | Basic Information › Primary Email                   |

> | Signed Response | Enabled ✅                                          |

Reviewer 2: +1

Keep these values handy in your text editor, as we'll need them later.

> ### Attribute Mapping

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Attribute mapping
```

Next, we configure which user attributes Google should send to authentik.
This is where we map the Google Directory attributes to the attributes that authentik expects.

| Google Directory attributes       | App attributes |
| --------------------------------- | -------------- |
| Basic Information › Primary Email | `email`        |

> ### Enable the app for your organization

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Enable the application for your organization
```

> Finally, we complete the app creation process by saving the configuration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Finally, we complete the application creation process by saving the configuration.
```

> You should now see the new app in the list of SAML apps. View the app details and confirm that the SSO URL and Entity ID are correct. Note that you may need to **enable the app** for your organization to allow users to authenticate.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You should now see the new application in the list of SAML apps. View the application details and confirm that the SSO URL and Entity ID are correct. Note that you may need to **enable the app** for your organization to allow users to authenticate.
```

---

> ## authentik Configuration

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## authentik configuration
```

We'll now configure authentik to accept SAML authentication from Google Workspace.

> Start by logging into your authentik instance as an administrator and navigating to the _Admin Interface_.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Start by logging into your authentik instance as an administrator and navigating to the Admin Interface.
```

Reviewer: We don't do any special formatting for the Admin interface, since it is not really a UI component or element... it is the UI. ;-)

### Creating a Federation Source

> From the admin interface, navigate to _Directory_ › _Federation & Social login_ and press **Create**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the admin interface, navigate to **Directory -> Federation & Social login** and press **Create**.
```

> Within the new source dialog, choose **SAML Source** and continue by filling in the following fields with your desired values:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the **New source** modal, choose **SAML Source** and continue by filling in the following fields:
```

| Field | Value            |
| ----- | ---------------- |
| Name  | Google Workspace |
| Slug  | `google`         |

:::info

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Heads up! Your choice of `slug` should match the ACS URL you provided to Google Workspace.
You can choose a different slug, but you will need to update the ACS URL in Google Workspace to match.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

:::

> #### Protocol Settings

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Protocol settings
```

Next, we'll configure the SAML protocol settings for the source. Fill in the following fields with the values you copied from Google Workspace:

|                  |                                                           |
| ---------------- | --------------------------------------------------------- |
| SSO URL          | `https://accounts.google.com/o/saml2/idp?idpid=#########` |

> | Entity ID/Issuer | `https://authentik.company`                               |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Issuer (Entity ID) | `https://authentik.company`                               |
```

Reviewer: want to reflect the UI as closely as possible.

> #### Advanced Protocol Settings

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Advanced protocol settings
```

Depending on your Google Workspace configuration, you may need to adjust the advanced protocol settings.

| Field                     | Value         |
| ------------------------- | ------------- |
| Allow idP-initiated Login | Enabled ✅    |

> | NameID Policy             | Email Address |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| NameID Policy             | Email address |
```

> Finally, save the source configuration and confirm the app is present in the list of federated sources.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Finally, save the source configuration and confirm the application is present in the list of federated sources.
```

## Testing your configuration

To test your configuration, navigate to the login page of your authentik instance and confirm the Google Workspace option is available as an alternative login method.

Next, click on the Google Workspace button and confirm that you are redirected to authenticate via your Google Workspace credentials. After successful authentication **with a non-super-admin account**, you should be redirected back to your authentik instance and logged in.

## Troubleshooting

Most issues stem from a misconfiguration on Google Workspace or authentik. However, your workspace may take a few minutes to propagate changes depending on the size of your organization.

### `403 app_not_configured_for_user`

Confirm that the entity ID (AKA "Issuer") matches the value you've provided both in Google Workspace and authentik. This can be any unique identifier, but it must match between the two services.

### `403 app_not_enabled_for_user`

> In the Google Workspace Admin Console, go to Menu › Apps › Web and mobile apps.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the Google Workspace Admin Console, go to **Menu -> Apps -> Web and mobile apps**.
```

> 1. In the app list, locate the SAML app generating the error.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. In the application list, locate the SAML app generating the error.
```

> 2. Click the app to open its Settings page.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Click the applcation to open its Settings page.
```

> 3. Click User access.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Click **User access**.
```

> 4. Turn the app ON for everyone or for the user’s organization.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. Turn the application ON for everyone or for the user’s organization.
```

This may take a few minutes to propagate, so try logging in again after a short wait.

> ## External links

Reviewer: I think I like this new addition... though as I mentioned, it creates a maintenance load to verify these links don;t change, and to add this section to the other docs. Let's leave it and think on the ROI. ;-)

Reviewer: External references...

### Placeholders

The following placeholders are used:

- `authentik.company`: The Fully Qualified Domain Name of the authentik installation.

## Google Workspace configuration

We'll need some information from Google to complete the integration, so
start by logging into [Workspace Admin Console](https://admin.google.com/) as a super-admin.

### Create a new application

From the Workspace Admin Console, navigate to the _Apps_ section, and then to _Web and mobile apps_.
Continue by expanding the **Add app** dropdown and selecting **Add custom SAML app.**

Within the app creation page, define the following **Name** and **Description** for the new application.

| Field       | Value                        |
| ----------- | ---------------------------- |
| Name        | authentik                    |
| Description | Single Sign-On for authentik |

Press **Continue** to generate the SAML configuration we'll need to complete the integration.

### Google Identity Provider details

You should now be presented with a choice to download metadata file containing the SAML configuration, or copy the details to your clipboard.

> Under _Option 2_, copy the SSO URL to your text editor and download the certificate.

Reviewer: It's still not clear where exactly this Option 2 is... name of page, where on which page is it, how do they find it...?

Author: I feel you. I’m also a bit puzzled on how to convey this step without making it more complex. The page is split into two sections titled “Option 1” and “Option 2”. The first section only contains a download button for the metadata. The second section titled “Option 2” has a series of labeled input fields to copy from. 

Sadly, we can’t change Google’s copy but I think the reader will be able to find their way. 😊

Reviewer: Thanks for looking at it again. Does the overall page have a name? Even that bit of guidance would be useful. Or, this might be a rare place where we do want a screenshot!

Author: The page header aligns with our title: "Google Identity Provider details"

IMO I'm hoping to avoid screenshots because they get stale so quickly. Given that this a subsection of docs under "Google Workspace configuration", I believe that the user will be able to follow the flow. This step is also one of the easier tasks since they're only copying information provided by Google, rather than filling out more fields.

Reviewer: When writing instructions, procedurals, I def state the place where they are to do the task. However, this doc is written in a more friendly, narrative form of instructions... so sure, lets leave as is.

[Read more about uploading certificates ›](../../../../../sys-mgmt/certificates)

:::

Before you proceed, copy these values to your text editor as we'll need them when configuring authentik.

### Attribute mapping

Next, we configure which user attributes Google should send to authentik.
This is where we map the Google Directory attributes to the attributes that authentik expects.

| Google Directory attributes       | App attributes |
| --------------------------------- | -------------- |
| Basic Information › Primary Email | `email`        |

### Enable the application for your organization

Finally, we complete the application creation process by saving the configuration.

You should now see the new application in the list of SAML apps. View the application details and confirm that the SSO URL and Entity ID are correct. Note that you may need to **enable the app** for your organization to allow users to authenticate.

---

## authentik configuration

We'll now configure authentik to accept SAML authentication from Google Workspace.

Start by logging into your authentik instance as an administrator and navigating to the Admin Interface.

> ### Creating a Federation Source

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Create a Federation Source
```

> In the admin interface, navigate to **Directory -> Federation & Social login** and press **Create**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the Admin interface, navigate to **Directory -> Federation & Social login** and press **Create**.
```

In the **New source** modal, choose **SAML Source** and continue by filling in the following fields:

| Field | Value            |
| ----- | ---------------- |
| Name  | Google Workspace |
| Slug  | `google`         |

:::info{title="Choosing a slug"}
Your choice of `slug` should match the ACS URL you provided to Google Workspace.
You can choose a different slug, but you will need to update the ACS URL in Google Workspace to match.
:::

#### Protocol settings

Next, we'll configure the SAML protocol settings for the source. Fill in the following fields with the values you copied from Google Workspace:

|                          |                                                           |
| ------------------------ | --------------------------------------------------------- |
| SSO URL                  | `https://accounts.google.com/o/saml2/idp?idpid=#########` |
| Issuer (Entity ID)       | `https://authentik.company`                               |
| Verification Certificate | _Certificate downloaded from Google Workspace_            |

#### Advanced protocol settings

> Depending on your Google Workspace configuration, you may need to adjust the advanced protocol settings.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Depending on your Google Workspace configuration, you might need to adjust the advanced protocol settings.
```
